---
layout: exhibit
title: 'REPSA: Sedimented Histories'
author: Elizabeth Bynum
publish_date: 2019-02-11
permalink: /exhibits/a/
---

The rainy season brings forth proliferation, spreading, entangling vines and flowers and green. Arising from rocky ground, the flora of the Reserva Ecológica del Pedregal de San Ángel, sprouts, grows, and expands. These entanglements, such as they are, are broken up by new kinds of solid formations, the cement of university buildings, the pavement of major roads. These entanglements emerge in fragments, but fragments provide clues. To be fragmented implies past connection, hinting at relationships that are often temporally confined to “the past,” but that can be accessed again through an awareness of traces and linkages.  

{% include parallax_image.html collection='repsa' pid='obj9' y='50%' %}

To pay attention to past connection, and perhaps future attachments, I would conjure spaces beyond the current borders of the reserve, because those lines and fences and fragmentations are fresh, relatively speaking. To knowthe Pedregal and its reserve, to outline prior geometries, we can start by erasing from our maps (for a moment), the Ciudad Universitaria, its metro station, the Avenida Insurgentes and its buses and cars, the neighborhood of San Ángel.
More than 1600 years ago, before the boundaries and places we find on Google Maps and REPSA’s website were brought into existence, and other visions of the world’s spatial organization were in force, the volcano of Xitle exploded. The lava flowed and buried prior places in its path as it spilled northward. The lava covered 80km2, as we (some of us) would measure these things now, covering the city of Cuicuilco. The spill did not happen all at once and the landscape was not remade in a day. The lava might have flowed for two or three years, maybe for as long as nine. When it finally cooled, materializing as solid, a new process of becoming could begin. Xitle may have ended one world or an arrangement of it, but new ones eventually grew up in its place, and the lava flows gave birth to the stony ground of the Pedregal.

In recent decades, the Pedregal’s value, as patrimony of the University and of society, is described in terms of its scientific significance, as a result of the unique confluence of geological and biological forms. The reserve sits in a zone of intersection between the neartic and neotropical realms, with the possibility for an astonishing range of life. Much of the remnants of the Pedregal that the reserve protects are covered in scrubby grasses and bushes that can survive without much water, the matorral xerófilo. The processes of the lava’s solidification created an incredible variety of surfaces, dips, fissures, and caves, as well as open areas dotted by the native palo loco today. These geological formations create environments for a wide variety of living entities, and result in variable temperatures and humidities within the reserve: microclimates.

Previously, the Pedregal was significant for other reasons to peoples living in the Valley of Mexico. The very grassiness of the Pedregal itself may have marked it out as a symbolically important landscape for the Mexica. Colonial accounts describe the importance of the Pedregal for indigenous ritual hunts of rabbits, deer, and coyotes. Petroglyphs that have been found in the area suggest the Pedregal’s cosmological significance, like that of a 12 meter serpent described in 1917. Cycles of growth and regrowth can obscure old places and routes, year to year and over time, but the traces of these old engagements may remain.

Standing in the reserve in 2019, it might be reasonable to wonder about other past presences and their remains, too. Did Pedro Rojas move through the Pedregal in the 19th century as an insurgent in the struggle for Mexican Independence? Did American troops trample through these landscapes of tangled plants during the expansions of Manifest Destiny in the 1840s? How often were the fissures and caves in the Pedregal places to hide in times of conflict or uncertainty?

In the 20th century, the Pedregal became a place for excursionists to experience the enveloping presence of nature close to the city, in the so-called malpaís of the Pedregal. In the 1950s, the lava flows of the Pedregal were radically re-peopled after Manuel Ávila Camacho’s government expropriated the land of the Pedregal and the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México’s new academic landscape, the Ciudad Universitaria, took cement root on this rocky earth. The campus that was raised became a symbolically important site in its own right, as a monument to architectural modernism and pre-hispanic imagery. The reserve as reserve only came into existence in the 1980s, in a convergence of student and faculty protest against proposed further development of the Pedregal. In the end, the only development project to materialize was the Ciudad Universitaria Metro Station I asked you to erase from your maps earlier, making the rest specters. The legacy of these mobilizations is not just those absences, but the reserve itself.

{% include inline_image.html collection='repsa' pid='obj7' %}

To create something called a reserve is to mark or bound, to attempt to keep, or even keep out. The project of the reserve carved out, from landscapes of volcanic spill, and new incursions of buildings, sidewalks, and roads a territory of 124.5 hectares when it was first established in 1983. Thirty five years later it encompasses 237.3 hectares, separated into pieces, centers and peripheries, nuclei and buffers, places with different kinds of public accessibility. But the reserve itself both contains what it is not supposed to, and lacks what it “ought” to have. Within the reserve, non-native animals, stray cats and dogs, and trash concentrate, accumulate. In some cases, people who have nowhere else to go find shelter in the reserve. Fires are not uncommon, and can spread quickly in the reserve. As far as the reserve scientists know, no one has seen the native grey foxes, or any traces of them, in the reserve since 2007. In the rainy season though, fragments of the reserve still contain the possibility to be enveloping. When the vegetation grows thicker, there are places where you can neither see nor hear Avenida Insurgentes, even as 25,000 cars stream past on an average day. To disappear out of sight in the reserve is also easy, or maybe to just disappear.

The reserve does not just conserve existing spaces and fragments, but it creates new landscapes. Along the circuito exterior road of the campus, the reserve’s zonas de amortiguamiento, buffer zones, section out spaces of greenery, sometimes between two streams of traffic, and spliced by sidewalks and staircases.

This was always a space of human-nonhuman interaction, but new marks of that engagement come through in the tops of buildings seen from far away, the criss-crossing of roads, the sounds of traffic and voices, and also in art. The Espaco Escultórico and the Paseo de las Esculturas, which includes Federico Silva’s “Serpientes del Pedregal,” were constructed in the 1970s, and are integrated into the landscape of the Pedregal. The appearance of brightly colored sculptures contrast with the surrounding vegetation of green and yellow, and through artistic boundings of space, these works create new sightlines. Recently, when the university built the Edificio H academic building, students and faculty protested the visual interruption to the horizon. The building stayed, and the sight line is what it is.

The idea of a reserve aims to avoid infringement or degradation, but even the reserve directors seem to recognize that is not fully possible. The hidden spaces of the Pedregal’s geological and biological making create room for the plants and animals of the reserve but also secluded meeting spots for young people. Signs posted in and around the reserve outline the biological and geological importance of the place, but that is not an effective deterrent, and alcohol bottles and other trash are easily spotted in the reserve.
Other kinds of things get in, too. The patchwork of spaces that constitute the reserve includes the Jardín Botánico, a network of paths that reveal cacti and agave plants, ponds and quiet places. The garden, open to the public, includes species though that are not “native” to the environment of the Pedregal, an incorporation that can be seen to challenge the integrity of the reserve’s preservation project. Still, other life seeks to get out, reaching greenly through fence links, in a gesture towards expansion.

The reserve itself holds so many lively forms but it’s fragmented existence, if understood in certain ways, impedes upon the liveliness of others. The Pedregal has always been a place of human-nonhuman interaction. What is different now are the terms of that engagement.

---

### Notes

*Material for this essay draws on ethnographic research during June of 2018, and additional
information comes from:*

Barrios, Raúl García. “El origen de la reserva ecológica de la UNAM en CU: historia de un conflicto patrimonial y ambiental.” *Cultura y representaciones sociales*, 2014, 50.
“REPSA. Reserva Ecológica Del Pedregal de San Ángel.” Accessed February 10, 2019. http://www.repsa.unam.mx/.
Robles, Alejandro. “Geografía Cultural e Histórica Del Pedregal.” In *Reserva Ecológica “El Pedregal” de San Ángel: Ecología, Historia Natural y Manejo*, 323–42. Ciudad de México: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 1994.
Zambrano, Luis, Saúl Rodríguez Palacios, Marcela Pérez Escobedo, Guillermo Gil Alarcón, Pedro Camarena, and Antonio Lot. “La Reserva Ecológica Del Pedregal de San Ángel: Atlas de Riesgos.” Ciudad de México: Secretaría Ejecutiva de la Reserva Ecológica del Pedregal de San Ángel, 2016.
